CIP-0120? | Constitution specification (#796)
cardano-foundation/CIPs: CIP-0120/README.md

This standard could be augmented in the future via a separate CIP which aims to replace this one.

### Terminology

#### Capitalisation of key terms

To avoid unnecessary edits, and therefore checksum changes, constitution authors MUST follow the following standard English capitalisation rules unless a translation language indicates otherwise:

`Constitution` vs. `constitution`

- The Constitution in effect — either the "initial" one or any updated version — is unique and therefore capitalised ("Constitution") as a proper noun.
- Draft or proposed constitutions are not unique & therefore are not capitalised ("constitution") as a common noun.
- "Cardano Constitution" is a very specific proper noun phrase (also a title) and so each word is capitalised.
- The phrase "the Constitution", unless used non-specifically (e.g. "the constitution that voters prefer"), would generally be assumed to be _the_ Constitution and capitalised as a proper noun.

`Ada` vs. `ada` vs. `ADA`

- `Ada` is the currency, while `ada` indicates units of that currency (e.g. "Ada holders can accumulate more ada to increase their influence.")

> - `ADA` is the trading symbol (e.g. "Fluctuations in ADA might influence decisions about the Treasury.")

Reviewer: might also clarify the use of ₳ ?
There is a glossary definition used for years having this definition:

**₳ ada**
When talking about the cryptocurrency, do not capitalize, unless at the beginning of a sentence. All caps should be used for the ticker symbol only. Plural is ada. Unicode U+20B3.

**ADA**
The ticker symbol for ada, like EUR or USD. If in doubt, prefer ada. On social media, use $ADA.

Reviewer 2: @gufmar @Ryun1 I use `₳` all the time in my own notes, communications, spreadsheets, etc. but for Cardano constitution documents I believe the best clarification would be to tell people to avoid it... since it technically signifies an altogether different currency: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Argentine_austral

Author: I would prefer to not allow this symbol in the constitution text due to its alternative meaning as raised by @rphair

Reviewer 2: Also as per CIP meeting / @Ryun1 @Crypto2099 we are considering additional language to stick to the usual 8-bit character set (mainly to additionally restrict emojis) so @gufmar thanks for suggestion but I am resolving this.

replace this one.

### Terminology

#### Capitalisation of key terms

To avoid unnecessary edits, and therefore checksum changes, 
constitution authors MUST follow the following standard English capitalisation 
rules unless a translation language indicates otherwise:

`Constitution` vs. `constitution`

- The Constitution in effect — either the "initial" one or any updated version — is unique and therefore capitalised ("Constitution") as a proper noun.
- Draft or proposed constitutions are not unique & therefore are not capitalised ("constitution") as a common noun.
- "Cardano Constitution" is a very specific proper noun phrase (also a title) and so each word is capitalised.
- The phrase "the Constitution", unless used non-specifically (e.g. "the constitution that voters prefer"), would generally be assumed to be _the_ Constitution and capitalised as a proper noun.

`Ada` vs. `ada` vs. `ADA`

- `Ada` is the currency, while `ada` indicates units of that currency (e.g. "Ada holders can accumulate more ada to increase their influence.")
- `ADA` is the trading symbol (e.g. "Fluctuations in ADA might influence decisions about the Treasury.")

### Characters

> The constitution text MUST only contain UTF-8 characters.

Reviewer 3: Can this be more specific.  I've looked up UTF-8, and it appears to be a way to encode character numbers into binary.  This should be a character set.  ASCII, for example, shows a discrete set of characters that a writer can use when drafting.

Reviewer 2: @Ryun1 - @daniellestanko raises a vital point since UTF-8 will include emojis, "dingbats", and the like because of extending up to 4 bytes with a very broad range of characters; see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UTF-8#Encoding

I'd be tempted to restrict to the first 1920 code points (i.e. the 2-byte characters of UTF-8) but this would be biased toward Western languages and would certainly prevent e.g. a constitution translation in Chinese... which would require the 3-byte characters of the [Basic Multilingual Plane](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plane_(Unicode)#Basic_Multilingual_Plane) which, counter to your original goal, also includes graphical symbols.

Therefore I think you will have to include a subjective specification (unfortunately, perhaps unenforceable by text filters or anything but a manual reading) like:
```suggestion
The constitution text MUST only contain printable text characters in UTF-8 encoding.
```
The Multilingual Plane also includes mathematical symbols and therefore would accommodate constitutions which, for whatever reason, have mathematical expressions in their text (I think we are bound to see this at some point).

### Lines

Each line in the constitution text MUST contain at maximum 80 characters,
including spaces and punctuation.

#### Sentences

The constitution text MUST only contain a maximum of one sentence per group of 
lines delimited by one blank line between these groups.

> Each sentence MUST be followed by a newline.

Reviewer 3: From a reader's perspective, this is not great. As a reader, I want to see paragraphs with a space between them, not each sentence.  What's the rationale behind this requirement?

Author: The assumption is that when rendered, the newlines are not rendered, only the new paragraphs.

Reviewer 2: @daniellestanko - @Ryun1 and I discussed this in https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/pull/796#discussion_r1573302193 but mainly by my own fault we didn't satisfy our own goal of keeping the formatting clean (1 sentence per line or group of lines) while _also_ allowing paragraphs with more than once sentence.  I'll submit a text modification below which I believe will properly satisfy the latter requirement.

Reviewer 2: Continued in https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/pull/796#pullrequestreview-2085822746.

> The assumption is that when rendered, the newlines are not rendered, only the new paragraphs.

@Ryun1 this assumption is true: but as written above I think it will make readers & constitution authors think that only 1 sentence per paragraph is allowed.

Let's continue below (resolving this one) so we can edit this section so it's absolutely clear & can be interpreted without too much thought on the reader's part (this change request only refers to the last line, which isn't the source the of the difficulty).

> The constitution text MUST only contain a maximum of one sentence per group of 
> lines delimited by one blank line between these groups.
> Each sentence MUST be followed by a newline.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The constitution text MUST only contain a maximum of one sentence per group of adjacent
lines and MUST have one and only one blank line between paragraphs.
```

Each sentence SHOULD start on its own line with a capitalized letter.

Example:

```md
This is a short sentence on one line.

This is a long sentence and I have valid reasons for it being so long,
such as being an example of a long sentence.
```

While 80 characters is a limit, authors don't have to try and always hit 80.
Legibility should be kept in mind.

### File Type

> The constitution file MUST be a text file named `constitution.txt`.

Reviewer 3: I think we may want versioning for the file name. I don't know if it changes anything from a technical perspective, but from a legibility perspective, over time I want to differentiate the versions of the constitution. Ex) If I download all of them into a folder to read and compare, I wouldn't want constitution.txt, constituiton.txt(1), constitution.txt(2) etc.  It would be better to have 1constitution.txt, 2constituiton.txt  etc. (in the file name itself).

Author: Yup!
sensible suggestion, I will put forward a change for this.

Author: addressed in  [1b87d84](https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/pull/796/commits/1b87d8463505e4d5943e2226a0894c20f45bcbb3)

### Hashing

When supplying a constitution hash digest to chain, the algorithm used MUST be 
Blake2b-256.
Before creating a hash digest the constitution plain text MUST be in its raw 
text, including any [Rich Text Formatting](#rich-text-formatting) 
related characters.

### Storage

The each ratified constitution MUST be stored, 
immutably on a distributed storage mechanism such as IPFS.
Where backups can be easily made in a permissionless manner by 
interested parties.
This storage platform MUST be easily accessible, with strong tooling support.
Authors SHOULD NOT specify the use of centralized gateways to access 
the constitution plain text.

### Rich Text Formatting

The constitution text MAY include a strict subset of rich text styling as 
defined in this specification.
Tooling rendering the constitution SHOULD recognize these and render them 
faithfully.

> #### Headers

Reviewer 3: Should we specify that each header and list should have a blank line before and after it?  It seems like a common markdown error that we could easily avoid.

Author: Yup!
I will add this as a SHOULD

Author: addressed in  [1b87d84](https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/pull/796/commits/1b87d8463505e4d5943e2226a0894c20f45bcbb3)

iteration.

### Interoperability

By defining a file extension and formatting rules for the constitution we
ensure that tooling reading and writing the constitution will be interoperable.
Furthermore we aim to make the role of constitution iteration comparison tools
easier, by minimizing formatting and style changes between iterations.
This will reduce compatibility issues between tools,
promoting the accessibility of the constitution.

### Usability

Rich text formatting greatly enhances the readability of text,
especially in large complex documents.
Without the ability to format text, it could easily become cumbersome to read,
negatively effecting the accessability of the Cardano constitution.

## Specification

The following specification SHOULD be applied to all constitution iterations.
This standard could be augmented in the future via a separate CIP which aims to
replace this one.

### Terminology

#### Capitalisation of key terms

To avoid unnecessary edits, and therefore checksum changes,
constitution authors MUST follow the following standard English capitalisation
rules unless a translation language indicates otherwise:

`Constitution` vs. `constitution`

> - The Constitution in effect — either the "initial" one or any updated version — is unique and therefore capitalised ("Constitution") as a proper noun.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The Constitution in effect — either the "initial" one or any new constitution — is unique and therefore capitalised ("Constitution") as a proper noun.
```
The changes @Hornan7 proposed today in https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/pull/847 would make sense to update here as well: since, especially if any constitution updates are hashed completely (rather than storing or hashing their difference) that every "updated" constitution is in fact a _new_ constitution.

Author: sure, makes sense!

iteration.

### Interoperability

By defining a file extension and formatting rules for the constitution we
ensure that tooling reading and writing the constitution will be interoperable.
Furthermore we aim to make the role of constitution iteration comparison tools
easier, by minimizing formatting and style changes between iterations.
This will reduce compatibility issues between tools,
promoting the accessibility of the constitution.

### Usability

Rich text formatting greatly enhances the readability of text,
especially in large complex documents.
Without the ability to format text, it could easily become cumbersome to read,
negatively effecting the accessability of the Cardano constitution.

## Specification

The following specification SHOULD be applied to all constitution iterations.
This standard could be augmented in the future via a separate CIP which aims to
replace this one.

### Terminology

#### Capitalisation of key terms

To avoid unnecessary edits, and therefore checksum changes,
constitution authors MUST follow the following standard English capitalisation
rules unless a translation language indicates otherwise:

> `Constitution` vs. `constitution`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
##### `Constitution` vs. `constitution`
```

Author: nice suggestion!

- The Constitution in effect — either the "initial" one or any new constitution — is unique and therefore capitalised ("Constitution") as a proper noun.
- Draft or proposed constitutions are not unique & therefore are not capitalised ("constitution") as a common noun.
- "Cardano Constitution" is a very specific proper noun phrase (also a title) and so each word is capitalised.
- The phrase "the Constitution", unless used non-specifically (e.g. "the constitution that voters prefer"), would generally be assumed to be _the_ Constitution and capitalised as a proper noun.

> `Ada` vs. `ada` vs. `ADA`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
##### `Ada` vs. `ada` vs. `ADA`
```
